---
layout: story
category: stories
title: MapOff
#person: Tyler Machado, Journalist 
country: United States
image: mapoff-group.jpg
altText: International agencies coordinated ground relief efforts after Typhoon Haiyan/Yolanda, Republic of the Philippines, November 2013; remote online mapping events supported the work. Photo by U.S. Army, SPC Andrew Robertson.
caption: International agencies coordinated ground relief efforts after Typhoon Haiyan/Yolanda, Republic of the Philippines, November 2013; remote online mapping events supported the work. Photo by U.S. Army, SPC Andrew Robertson.
twitterDescription: "Before typhoon Haiyan made landfall, mappers went to work. "
twitterImage: "../assets/img/mapoff-group.jpg"
ogDescription: "Read about how mappers helped in the aftermath of the 2013 typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines."
ogImage: "../assets/img/mapoff-group.jpg"
emailSubject: Before typhoon Haiyan made landfall, mappers went to work.
emailDescription: "In November 2013, the Humanitarian OpenSteetMap Team (HOT) activated volunteer mappers well in advance of super typhoon Haiyan making landfall in the Philippines in order to gather a baseline of geographic data."
lat: 38.9
lon: -77.01
---

Competition heated up as George Mason University and George Washington University went head-to-head at the MapOff held on Friday, March 27. Hosted by the Department of Geography and Geoinformation Science, the event was supported by MapGive, USAID’s Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) and USAID, GeoCenter, and Missing Maps and had a great turnout with more than 220 mappers in attendance!

####Students from George Mason University, with help from Northern Virginia Community College students and the local community picked from three featured projects:
-Kelud, Indonesia: Focusing on volcanoes and disaster preparedness

-Canaan, Haiti: Focusing on risk reduction and urban planning efforts

-Liberia: Supporting Last Mile Health Liberia projects

Students from George Washington University, collaborated with students from Texas Tech and mapped areas in Khulna, Bangladesh that were focused on agricultural development. The data will be checked for quality and used for planning development activities by USAID for their Feed the Future program. 

The event was a hit for beginners and filled three of the computer labs in the Geography and Geoinformation Science Department. Several attendees were first time mappers, taking their initial steps by exploring the tools and making use of provided satellite imagery services. A separate room was reserved for more experienced mappers, allowing them to really take off. We were even able to communicate with a George Washington University student via webcam. (Insert photo)

Music helped get people in the groove and pizza and refreshments were provided by USGIF. You know that when mappers were too engrossed in their task to break for food, they were really enjoying their work.

(Insert mapper participant quote)

The <a href="http://mapgive.state.gov/events/mapoff" target="_blank"> event link</a> was set up to highlight the occasion and associated projects. Each project page was linked to a digital tracing how-to guide, as well as to the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team’s Tasking Manager. In addition, before and after maps for each project allowed for progress visualization. The tracing guides were developed in collaboration between MapGive, Missing Maps, and USAID (both OFDA and GeoCenter) in the weeks leading up to the event. 

The event site included a results page which consisted of a web map where participants could click on their username and identify all of the features they contributed. Below the map, a series of charts displayed the number of different types of features each school was completing. Note, Texas Tech was grouped in with GWU and NOVA was grouped with GMU. Students really enjoyed the visual charts showing how many features each school had completed, as this put a competitive spin on the event.

({insert Table of Metrics results} {table 1: col: projects, row: ways, roads, buildings} {table 2: col: school, row: ways, roads, buildings})

    Using the metrics calculated in near real-time, World Atlases donated by National Geographic were awarded to the top 2 mappers. Features created by each mapper are displayed below.

(Insert picture- have these two photos)

    Since the conclusion of the event, organizations have been heavily focusing on follow-up and feedback. MapGive is taking advantage of virtual volunteers (insert link)  to validate squares for River Cress, Liberia. OFDA has been working hard on validation in Karangetang and has shared building and road data with the U.S. Volcano Disaster Assistance Program. The two larger mapping projects were Canaan and Kelud, so with plenty of work left to do, we were able to connect different schools to these projects; these schools hosted Mapathons for Earth Observation Day during the week of April 8th. 

(Insert EOD quote)

    In addition, various planners held an After Action Review, a two-hour discussion covering topics like: technology, mapping, and communications. Several new ideas were introduced on how to improve future events and increase collaboration. We cannot wait for the next event!

###Acknowledgements
-Sven Fuhrmann, Associate Professor in Geography and Geoinformation Science (GGS), helped organize the event at GMU. Sam Cooke was an important contributor by creating flyers and graphics, promoting the event, and handling logistics. Big thanks to Anthony Stefanidis and the GGS department for their support.

-NOVA ASPRS and GMU ASPRS clubs: Too many people to thank! Many people were very supportive and contributed to planning, volunteering at the event, and training new mappers.

-OFDA: David Saeger and Keifer Gonzalez were responsible for preparing the two volcano projects (Karangetang and Kelud). They created the tracing guides and trained new mappers at the event.

-USAID GeoCenter: Chad Blevins and the rest of GeoCenter. We are always grateful to have them as a partner.

-GWU: Richard Hinton and Nuala Cowan, professors at GWU who have taken the lead in integrating OSM in Higher Education. Early on in the planning for having a Mapathon at GMU, we found out they were planning a Mapathon the very same day. Fortunately, we were able to come together and make this into a much bigger event.

-Texas Tech: Glad to see they had a successful event and look forward to having them as a future partner!

-Robert Soden (OSM-history) and Development Seed (osm-meta-util); without their open source software out metrics would not have been possible.

-Missing Maps: Instrumental in planning the Mapathon and providing one of the featured projects.

-USGIF for supporting the event at GMU with food and drinks

-National Geographic for providing the two excellent Atlases given away as prizes

